hey this is pressed all Walker and
you're watching mind your decisions
here's a fun little magic trick you can
perform any time here at the bookstore
the library or anywhere that has book
barcodes let's say you ask someone to
pick out any book in the store and they
bring Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's
Stone now on the back side of the book
is a barcode tell them to locate a 13
digit number that starts with the
numbers 9 7 & 8 this is the isbn-13 code
now the numbers look pretty random but
in fact there's a secret mathematical
code hidden in these numbers the code is
that the very last digit the 13th digit
is known as a check digit and it's
determined by the other 12 numbers the
check digit helps detect errors if the
barcode has been damaged or the number
has been entered incorrectly so we're
going to take these first 12 numbers and
color code them alternately the first
thing we'll do is we'll add up every
other number starting with the first
number on the left so we add 9 8 3 8 9
and 1 this will give a sum of 38 we then
take the sum of all of the other digits
here colored in green and then we
multiply that sum by 3 this will give a
result of 78 now we add up these two
results and we get 116 to get the check
digit we answer the following question
what number do you need to add to get to
a multiple of 10 so what positive number
will bring 116 up to a multiple of 10
well 120 is a multiple of 10 so we need
to add 4 to 116 therefore 4 is the check
digit and in fact that's the very last
digit of this barcode now let's do
another example with everyone's favorite
book the joy of game theory so I'm
already blocked out the 13th digit let's
see if we can calculate what it is
so we first add up all of the black
digits we then add up all of the green
digits we take that sum and multiply it
by three we then add these two results
together and we get 104 now what
positive number do we need to add to get
to a multiple of 10 well if we add 6 to
104 we'll get to 110 so 6 is going to be
our check digit and in fact 6 is the
last digit of this barcode so it's a
neat little trick that you can calculate
the last digit from the other 12 and
it'll be a surprise to many people
because they don't realize that the last
digit is calculated from the other 12
now for those curious here's a general
mathematical calculation of the check
digit you can use it to calculate the
last digit of any isbn-13 code now let's
say someone brings you a book that was
published a long time ago like The
Elements of Style and it doesn't have a
13 digit number it'll probably have a 10
digit number like the following this is
the older is pm10 code and there is a
similar check digit process for that
it's much more complicated but let me
just explain how it works you can
calculate the 10th digit from the other
night so you're going to take the first
digit and multiply it by 10 you take the
second digit multiply it by 9 and you
take the third digit multiply it by 8
and so on where you have decreasing
weights over each of the following
digits so this is much more complicated
to solve especially using mental math
but let's say you have the calculator
and you're able to calculate these sums
you then need to add up all of these
numbers and then you need to ask the
question what single digit number do you
need to add to get to a multiple of 11
well for 111 we actually need to add 10
to get to 121 so that's not a single
digit but an I use BM 10 what you do is
if you get 10 you use the single digit
of X as a Roman numeral because X is
equal to 10 as a Roman numeral
so here X is the check digit in an ISBN
ten code but if you got a single digit
from zero to nine you would just use
that single digit of zero tonight so
here's the general process to finding
the check digit in the ISBN ten code you
take the weighted sum of each digit and
then you calculate the following if you
get a number of ten you need to use X
otherwise use the single digits going
from zero to nine so it's a fun little
trick that you can calculate the last
digit in the barcode from the other
digits thanks for watching these math
videos available for free on YouTube
build confidence for students and
inspire mathematical discovery for
viewers around the world they have over
a hundred million views and the channel
now has over 1 million subscribers
please subscribe for free to get the
newest videos and email me a puzzle or
topic presh and mind your decisions comm
you can grab a mug or t-shirt or you can
check out my books both of these links
are listed in the video description you
can also support me on patreon for
exclusive rewards thanks for watching
and thanks for your support